task7/README.md, before:

# Task 7: External Interrupt (EIC) – Flashing an LED

In this task, you will learn how to configure the **External Interrupt Controller (EIC)** on the SAM microcontroller.  
The goal is to trigger an **interrupt** when a button is pressed, and inside the interrupt handler, toggle or flash an LED.

This builds on what you learned in Task 2 (interrupts on AVR) but now uses the **EIC peripheral** available on the ATSAM series.

---

## 1. What is the EIC?

- The **External Interrupt Controller (EIC)** allows the MCU to respond to external events (like button presses or sensor signals).  
- Each EIC line is mapped to one or more GPIO pins.  
- You can configure the interrupt to trigger on:
  - Rising edge (low → high)
  - Falling edge (high → low)
  - Both edges
  - Low or high level  

Using the EIC is more efficient than constantly polling a pin in your main loop.

---

## 2. Example: Configure Button on PB19, LED on PC5

For this example:
- **PB19** = button input (connected to EIC channel)  
- **PC5** = LED output  

Check your development board’s schematics/datasheet to confirm which pins are available for EIC input.

---

## 3. Initialization Steps

1. **Enable EIC clock** via the Generic Clock Controller (GCLK).  
2. **Configure the GPIO pin** (e.g., PA15) as an input with pull-up enabled.  
3. **Connect the pin to an EIC channel** using the Port Multiplexer (PMUX).  
4. **Configure the EIC** to detect rising or falling edges.  
5. **Enable the EIC interrupt** in the NVIC.  
6. **Write an interrupt handler (ISR)** to toggle the LED.

---

## 4. Example Code

```c
#include "sam.h"

void eic_init(void) {

    /* Selection of the Generator and write Lock for EIC */
    GCLK_REGS->GCLK_PCHCTRL[4] = GCLK_PCHCTRL_GEN(0x1UL)  | GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk;

    while ((GCLK_REGS->GCLK_PCHCTRL[4] & GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk) != GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk)
    {
        /* Wait for synchronization */
    }

    // Enable the pullup resistors for PA15
    PORT_REGS->GROUP[0].PORT_OUT = ( 1 << 15);
    PORT_REGS->GROUP[0].PORT_PINCFG[15] = 0x7U; // Enable pullup, input and pmux
    
    // Enable output on PA14
    PORT_REGS->GROUP[0].PORT_DIR = (1 << 14);





    EIC_REGS->EIC_CTRLA |= (uint8_t)EIC_CTRLA_SWRST_Msk;

    while((EIC_REGS->EIC_SYNCBUSY & EIC_SYNCBUSY_SWRST_Msk) == EIC_SYNCBUSY_SWRST_Msk)
    {
        /* Wait for sync */
    }

    /* EIC is by default clocked by GCLK */

    /* NMI Control register */

    /* Interrupt sense type and filter control for EXTINT channels 8 to 15 */
    EIC_REGS->EIC_CONFIG[1] |= EIC_CONFIG_SENSE7_RISE;

    /* External Interrupt enable*/
    EIC_REGS->EIC_INTENSET = (1 << 15);


    EIC_REGS->EIC_CTRLA |= (uint8_t)EIC_CTRLA_ENABLE_Msk;

    while((EIC_REGS->EIC_SYNCBUSY & EIC_SYNCBUSY_ENABLE_Msk) == EIC_SYNCBUSY_ENABLE_Msk)
    {
        /* Wait for sync */
    }


    NVIC_SetPriorityGrouping(0x00);

    __DMB();
    __enable_irq();

    NVIC_SetPriority(EIC_EXTINT_15_IRQn, 3);
    NVIC_EnableIRQ(EIC_EXTINT_15_IRQn);
}


int main(void) {
    // Initialize EIC
    
    CLOCK_Initialize();
    eic_init();

    while (1) {
        // main loop does nothing, LED toggling handled in ISR
    }
}

void __attribute__((used)) EIC_EXTINT_15_Handler(void) { // Important the function name has to match 
    // Clear interrupt flag
    EIC_REGS->INTFLAG = (1 << 15);

    // Toggle LED
    PORT_REGS->GROUP[0].PORT_OUTTGL = (1 << 5);
}
```
---
## Optional Challenges

- Use Event Systems instead of EIC to use button interrupt without CPU

Commit message:

feat: add attribute used explanation

task7/README.md, after:

# Task 7: External Interrupt (EIC) – Flashing an LED

In this task, you will learn how to configure the **External Interrupt Controller (EIC)** on the SAM microcontroller.  
The goal is to trigger an **interrupt** when a button is pressed, and inside the interrupt handler, toggle or flash an LED.

This builds on what you learned in Task 2 (interrupts on AVR) but now uses the **EIC peripheral** available on the ATSAM series.

---

## 1. What is the EIC?

- The **External Interrupt Controller (EIC)** allows the MCU to respond to external events (like button presses or sensor signals).  
- Each EIC line is mapped to one or more GPIO pins.  
- You can configure the interrupt to trigger on:
  - Rising edge (low → high)
  - Falling edge (high → low)
  - Both edges
  - Low or high level  

Using the EIC is more efficient than constantly polling a pin in your main loop.

---

## 2. Example: Configure Button on PB19, LED on PC5

For this example:
- **PB19** = button input (connected to EIC channel)  
- **PC5** = LED output  

Check your development board’s schematics/datasheet to confirm which pins are available for EIC input.

---

## 3. Initialization Steps

1. **Enable EIC clock** via the Generic Clock Controller (GCLK).  
2. **Configure the GPIO pin** (e.g., PA15) as an input with pull-up enabled.  
3. **Connect the pin to an EIC channel** using the Port Multiplexer (PMUX).  
4. **Configure the EIC** to detect rising or falling edges.  
5. **Enable the EIC interrupt** in the NVIC.  
6. **Write an interrupt handler (ISR)** to toggle the LED.

---

## 4. Example Code

```c
#include "sam.h"

void eic_init(void) {

    /* Selection of the Generator and write Lock for EIC */
    GCLK_REGS->GCLK_PCHCTRL[4] = GCLK_PCHCTRL_GEN(0x1UL)  | GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk;

    while ((GCLK_REGS->GCLK_PCHCTRL[4] & GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk) != GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk)
    {
        /* Wait for synchronization */
    }

    // Enable the pullup resistors for PA15
    PORT_REGS->GROUP[0].PORT_OUT = ( 1 << 15);
    PORT_REGS->GROUP[0].PORT_PINCFG[15] = 0x7U; // Enable pullup, input and pmux
    
    // Enable output on PA14
    PORT_REGS->GROUP[0].PORT_DIR = (1 << 14);





    EIC_REGS->EIC_CTRLA |= (uint8_t)EIC_CTRLA_SWRST_Msk;

    while((EIC_REGS->EIC_SYNCBUSY & EIC_SYNCBUSY_SWRST_Msk) == EIC_SYNCBUSY_SWRST_Msk)
    {
        /* Wait for sync */
    }

    /* EIC is by default clocked by GCLK */

    /* NMI Control register */

    /* Interrupt sense type and filter control for EXTINT channels 8 to 15 */
    EIC_REGS->EIC_CONFIG[1] |= EIC_CONFIG_SENSE7_RISE;

    /* External Interrupt enable*/
    EIC_REGS->EIC_INTENSET = (1 << 15);


    EIC_REGS->EIC_CTRLA |= (uint8_t)EIC_CTRLA_ENABLE_Msk;

    while((EIC_REGS->EIC_SYNCBUSY & EIC_SYNCBUSY_ENABLE_Msk) == EIC_SYNCBUSY_ENABLE_Msk)
    {
        /* Wait for sync */
    }


    NVIC_SetPriorityGrouping(0x00);

    __DMB();
    __enable_irq();

    NVIC_SetPriority(EIC_EXTINT_15_IRQn, 3);
    NVIC_EnableIRQ(EIC_EXTINT_15_IRQn);
}


int main(void) {
    // Initialize EIC
    
    CLOCK_Initialize();
    eic_init();

    while (1) {
        // main loop does nothing, LED toggling handled in ISR
    }
}

void __attribute__((used)) EIC_EXTINT_15_Handler(void) { // Important the function name has to match 
    // Clear interrupt flag
    EIC_REGS->INTFLAG = (1 << 15);

    // Toggle LED
    PORT_REGS->GROUP[0].PORT_OUTTGL = (1 << 14);
}
```
---
## Explanation of __attribute__((used))

```c
__attribute__((used))
```
This is a compiler instruction that is used so the compiler does not remove the function.
When the compiler tries to optimize the code it will remove all unused function. Since interrupt handlers
are never directly called in the main function, these will often be optmized away.
To avoid this from happening we have to use **__attribute__((used))** to avoid this from happening

---

## Optional Challenges

- Use Event Systems instead of EIC to use button interrupt without CPU
