task6/README.md, before:

# Task 6: Clock Configuration

So far, we’ve been relying on the **default clock configuration** that comes after reset.  
But in real embedded projects, you often need to configure the **system clock** to achieve the right performance, enable certain peripherals, or reduce power consumption.  

In this task, you will learn how to:
- Understand the clock system in the SAM series
- Select a clock source (internal oscillator, external crystal, etc.)
- Configure the Generic Clock Controller (GCLK)
- Route the clock to a peripheral (example: Timer/Counter)

Since we in task7 will use EIC, I recommend Configuring the clock for EIC (External interrupt controller)

---

## 1. Why Clocks Matter

Every operation inside a microcontroller is driven by a clock signal.  
- The **CPU clock** determines how fast instructions execute.  
- Peripheral clocks (timers, ADC, USART, CAN, etc.) must be configured correctly to generate accurate timings.  
- Power consumption depends heavily on the clock source and frequency.  

If your clock is wrong:
- Delays and baud rates will be inaccurate.
- Timers may drift.
- Some peripherals may not work at all.

---

## 2. SAM Clock System Overview

On the SAM series, the clock system has several building blocks:

- **Clock Sources**:  
  - Internal Oscillators (e.g., OSC16M = 16 MHz RC oscillator)  
  - External Oscillators (crystals, clocks from outside the chip)  
  - DFLL (Digital Frequency Locked Loop)  
  - DPLL (Digital Phase Locked Loop)

- **Generic Clock Generators (GCLK)**:  
  - Take an input source (like OSC16M or DFLL).  
  - Divide or multiply it.  
  - Distribute it to peripherals.

- **Bus Clocks**:  
  - CPU/AHB, APBA, APBB, APBC — each peripheral group is tied to one.  

---


---

# 3. CPU Clock @ 48 MHz on SAMC21J17A (with GCLK & Peripheral Enable)

Below is a simplified example showing how to configure the CPU clock to **48 MHz** using the **internal 48 MHz oscillator (OSC48M)** and route it via **GCLK0**. Finally, we enable a peripheral clock (CAN0) as an example.

> **Why this matters:**
>
> * The CPU and peripherals won’t run at intended speeds unless the system clock is configured.
> * Baud rates, timers, and sampling frequencies all depend on correct clocking.
> * On SAMC21, **OSC48M** is the primary internal high-speed clock source. We select it, wait for it to be ready, and feed it to **GCLK0** (the main generator).

---

## 4. Configuring the Clock Source (OSC48M)

This function configures the **48 MHz internal oscillator** block (**OSC48M**) inside **OSCCTRL** and ensures it’s ready before use.

```c
#include "sam.h"

void OSCCTRL_Initialize(void) {
    /* Selection of the Division Value */
    OSCCTRL_REGS->OSCCTRL_OSC48MDIV = 0;

    while ((OSCCTRL_REGS->OSCCTRL_OSC48MSYNCBUSY &
            OSCCTRL_OSC48MSYNCBUSY_OSC48MDIV_Msk) ==
           OSCCTRL_OSC48MSYNCBUSY_OSC48MDIV_Msk) {
        /* Waiting for the synchronization */
    }

    while ((OSCCTRL_REGS->OSCCTRL_STATUS & OSCCTRL_STATUS_OSC48MRDY_Msk) !=
           OSCCTRL_STATUS_OSC48MRDY_Msk) {
        /* Waiting for the OSC48M Ready state */
    }

    OSCCTRL_REGS->OSCCTRL_OSC48MCTRL |= OSCCTRL_OSC48MCTRL_ONDEMAND_Msk;
}
```

### What each line does

* `OSCCTRL_OSC48MDIV = 0;`
  Sets the **divider** for the 48 MHz oscillator to **÷1** (no division). The output remains **48 MHz**.

  > If you needed 24 MHz, you’d pick a divider > 0 (check the datasheet’s valid values).

* `OSC48MSYNCBUSY` wait loop
  Many clock writes are **synchronized** across clock domains. You must wait until the hardware clears the sync-busy bit before proceeding, or later writes may be ignored.

* `OSCCTRL_STATUS & OSC48MRDY` wait loop
  Waits until the **48 MHz oscillator is stable/ready**. Using it before `RDY` is set can cause unpredictable behavior.

* `OSC48MCTRL |= ONDEMAND`
  **On-Demand** mode lets hardware **auto-gate** the oscillator when no consumer needs it (power-saving). As soon as something needs the clock (e.g., GCLK), the oscillator wakes up.

> **Tip:** If you’re troubleshooting a clock that seems to “disappear,” try disabling ONDEMAND during bring-up so the source stays active.

---

## 5. Configure the Main Generic Clock (GCLK0)

**GCLK0** is the “main generator” that typically feeds the **CPU** and many peripherals (directly or indirectly). Here we select **OSC48M** as its source and enable it.

```c
void GCLK0_Initialize(void) {
    GCLK_REGS->GCLK_GENCTRL[0] =
        GCLK_GENCTRL_DIV(0UL) | GCLK_GENCTRL_SRC(6UL) | GCLK_GENCTRL_GENEN_Msk;   

    while ((GCLK_REGS->GCLK_SYNCBUSY & GCLK_SYNCBUSY_GENCTRL0_Msk) ==
           GCLK_SYNCBUSY_GENCTRL0_Msk) {
        /* wait for the Generator 0 synchronization */
    }
}
```

### What each field means

* `GCLK_GENCTRL_DIV(0)`
  A divider of **0** means **divide by 1** on this generator (i.e., pass 48 MHz through unchanged).

  > If you needed a slower CPU/peripheral clock, you could divide here.

* `GCLK_GENCTRL_SRC(6)`
  **Source selector**. On SAMC21, `6` corresponds to **OSC48M** (internal 48 MHz).

  > Source IDs are silicon-specific; confirm the numeric code in the device header/datasheet.

* `GCLK_GENCTRL_GENEN`
  Enables the generator. Without this bit, the generator remains off even if configured.

* `SYNCBUSY` wait loop
  As with OSCCTRL, you **must** wait for GCLK to synchronize after changing its configuration.

> **Result:** GCLK0 now outputs **48 MHz** sourced from OSC48M.

---

## 6. Putting It Together & Enabling Peripheral Clocks

Finally, we call our two init functions and **enable a peripheral** (CAN0) by:

1. Routing a generator to the peripheral’s **PCHCTRL** (channel control), and
2. Enabling the module’s **bus clock** in **MCLK**.

```c
void CLOCK_Initialize(void) {
    /* Function to Initialize the Oscillators */
    OSCCTRL_Initialize();

    /* Function to Initialize the 32KHz Oscillators */

    GCLK0_Initialize();
    
    // Example configuring CAN0 peripherals
    GCLK_REGS->GCLK_PCHCTRL[26] = GCLK_PCHCTRL_GEN(0x0) | GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk;

    while ((GCLK_REGS->GCLK_PCHCTRL[26] & GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk) !=
           GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk) {
        /* Wait for synchronization */
    }

    MCLK_REGS->MCLK_AHBMASK |= (1 << 8);  // CAN0

}
```

### What’s happening here

* `OSCCTRL_Initialize();`
  Brings up **OSC48M** and waits for it to be stable.

* `GCLK0_Initialize();`
  Sets **GCLK0 = 48 MHz (OSC48M)**, divide-by-1.

* `GCLK_PCHCTRL[26] = GEN(0) | CHEN;`
  **Peripheral Channel 26** (CAN0 on SAMC21) is being **clocked by Generator 0** (GCLK0) and **enabled**.

  * `GEN(0)` selects **GCLK0** as the source for this peripheral’s channel.
  * `CHEN` actually **enables** the clock channel to the peripheral.
  * The wait loop ensures the channel is fully enabled before continuing.

* `MCLK_AHBMASK |= (1 << 8);`
  Enables the **AHB bus clock** to the **CAN0 module**.

  > On SAM devices, a peripheral typically needs **both**:
  >
  > 1. a **GCLK channel** (functional clock), and
  > 2. its **bus mask** (so the CPU can access its registers).
  >    Forgetting either one leads to “peripheral not responding” bugs.

> **Note on “32 kHz oscillators” comment:**
> The placeholder comment suggests you might later enable a **low-frequency** clock (e.g., OSC32K/RTC). It’s not used in this minimal example.

---

## Verification & Troubleshooting

* **Is the CPU really at 48 MHz?**

  * Toggle a GPIO in a tight loop and measure the frequency on a scope.
  * Or set up a timer to generate a 1 kHz square wave and confirm the period.

* **Peripheral doesn’t work?**

  * Check **both** the **GCLK\_PCHCTRL\[x]** (GEN + CHEN) **and** the **MCLK mask** for that peripheral.
  * Ensure the **source ID** for `GCLK_GENCTRL_SRC()` matches **OSC48M** on your part.
  * Make sure **SYNCBUSY** waits are present after each clock write.

* **Power saving (ONDEMAND) confusion:**

  * During bring-up, consider clearing ONDEMAND to keep the source always on. Add it back once you’re stable.

---

## Mental Model (Summary)

1. **Turn on** and **stabilize** a clock **source** (OSC48M @ 48 MHz).
2. Configure a **GCLK generator** (GCLK0) to **use that source** and **enable it**.
3. For each **peripheral**, connect a **GCLK channel** (PCHCTRL) and **enable its bus clock** (MCLK mask).
4. Always **wait for sync** after changing clock registers.

This flow will carry you through most clocking tasks on the SAMC21 family.

Commit message:

feat: add before you read description to task6 readme

task6/README.md, after:

# Task 6: Clock Configuration

So far, we’ve been relying on the **default clock configuration** that comes after reset.  
But in real embedded projects, you often need to configure the **system clock** to achieve the right performance, enable certain peripherals, or reduce power consumption.  

In this task, you will learn how to:
- Understand the clock system in the SAM series
- Select a clock source (internal oscillator, external crystal, etc.)
- Configure the Generic Clock Controller (GCLK)
- Route the clock to a peripheral (example: Timer/Counter)

Since we in task7 will use EIC, I recommend Configuring the clock for EIC (External interrupt controller)

---
## Before you read

This example shows clock configuration for the SAMC21 series. However since we under the learning period will use the
SAMEx series, a **clock.c** file is added under the task6 directory. This file can be copied and used in your code without
any changes. However peripheral clock still need to be configured. The logic still applies and I would still recommend studying
the code and explanations below

---

## 1. Why Clocks Matter

Every operation inside a microcontroller is driven by a clock signal.  
- The **CPU clock** determines how fast instructions execute.  
- Peripheral clocks (timers, ADC, USART, CAN, etc.) must be configured correctly to generate accurate timings.  
- Power consumption depends heavily on the clock source and frequency.  

If your clock is wrong:
- Delays and baud rates will be inaccurate.
- Timers may drift.
- Some peripherals may not work at all.

---

## 2. SAM Clock System Overview

On the SAM series, the clock system has several building blocks:

- **Clock Sources**:  
  - Internal Oscillators (e.g., OSC16M = 16 MHz RC oscillator)  
  - External Oscillators (crystals, clocks from outside the chip)  
  - DFLL (Digital Frequency Locked Loop)  
  - DPLL (Digital Phase Locked Loop)

- **Generic Clock Generators (GCLK)**:  
  - Take an input source (like OSC16M or DFLL).  
  - Divide or multiply it.  
  - Distribute it to peripherals.

- **Bus Clocks**:  
  - CPU/AHB, APBA, APBB, APBC — each peripheral group is tied to one.  

---


---

# 3. CPU Clock @ 48 MHz on SAMC21J17A (with GCLK & Peripheral Enable)

Below is a simplified example showing how to configure the CPU clock to **48 MHz** using the **internal 48 MHz oscillator (OSC48M)** and route it via **GCLK0**. Finally, we enable a peripheral clock (CAN0) as an example.

> **Why this matters:**
>
> * The CPU and peripherals won’t run at intended speeds unless the system clock is configured.
> * Baud rates, timers, and sampling frequencies all depend on correct clocking.
> * On SAMC21, **OSC48M** is the primary internal high-speed clock source. We select it, wait for it to be ready, and feed it to **GCLK0** (the main generator).

---

## 4. Configuring the Clock Source (OSC48M)

This function configures the **48 MHz internal oscillator** block (**OSC48M**) inside **OSCCTRL** and ensures it’s ready before use.

```c
#include "sam.h"

void OSCCTRL_Initialize(void) {
    /* Selection of the Division Value */
    OSCCTRL_REGS->OSCCTRL_OSC48MDIV = 0;

    while ((OSCCTRL_REGS->OSCCTRL_OSC48MSYNCBUSY &
            OSCCTRL_OSC48MSYNCBUSY_OSC48MDIV_Msk) ==
           OSCCTRL_OSC48MSYNCBUSY_OSC48MDIV_Msk) {
        /* Waiting for the synchronization */
    }

    while ((OSCCTRL_REGS->OSCCTRL_STATUS & OSCCTRL_STATUS_OSC48MRDY_Msk) !=
           OSCCTRL_STATUS_OSC48MRDY_Msk) {
        /* Waiting for the OSC48M Ready state */
    }

    OSCCTRL_REGS->OSCCTRL_OSC48MCTRL |= OSCCTRL_OSC48MCTRL_ONDEMAND_Msk;
}
```

### What each line does

* `OSCCTRL_OSC48MDIV = 0;`
  Sets the **divider** for the 48 MHz oscillator to **÷1** (no division). The output remains **48 MHz**.

  > If you needed 24 MHz, you’d pick a divider > 0 (check the datasheet’s valid values).

* `OSC48MSYNCBUSY` wait loop
  Many clock writes are **synchronized** across clock domains. You must wait until the hardware clears the sync-busy bit before proceeding, or later writes may be ignored.

* `OSCCTRL_STATUS & OSC48MRDY` wait loop
  Waits until the **48 MHz oscillator is stable/ready**. Using it before `RDY` is set can cause unpredictable behavior.

* `OSC48MCTRL |= ONDEMAND`
  **On-Demand** mode lets hardware **auto-gate** the oscillator when no consumer needs it (power-saving). As soon as something needs the clock (e.g., GCLK), the oscillator wakes up.

> **Tip:** If you’re troubleshooting a clock that seems to “disappear,” try disabling ONDEMAND during bring-up so the source stays active.

---

## 5. Configure the Main Generic Clock (GCLK0)

**GCLK0** is the “main generator” that typically feeds the **CPU** and many peripherals (directly or indirectly). Here we select **OSC48M** as its source and enable it.

```c
void GCLK0_Initialize(void) {
    GCLK_REGS->GCLK_GENCTRL[0] =
        GCLK_GENCTRL_DIV(0UL) | GCLK_GENCTRL_SRC(6UL) | GCLK_GENCTRL_GENEN_Msk;   

    while ((GCLK_REGS->GCLK_SYNCBUSY & GCLK_SYNCBUSY_GENCTRL0_Msk) ==
           GCLK_SYNCBUSY_GENCTRL0_Msk) {
        /* wait for the Generator 0 synchronization */
    }
}
```

### What each field means

* `GCLK_GENCTRL_DIV(0)`
  A divider of **0** means **divide by 1** on this generator (i.e., pass 48 MHz through unchanged).

  > If you needed a slower CPU/peripheral clock, you could divide here.

* `GCLK_GENCTRL_SRC(6)`
  **Source selector**. On SAMC21, `6` corresponds to **OSC48M** (internal 48 MHz).

  > Source IDs are silicon-specific; confirm the numeric code in the device header/datasheet.

* `GCLK_GENCTRL_GENEN`
  Enables the generator. Without this bit, the generator remains off even if configured.

* `SYNCBUSY` wait loop
  As with OSCCTRL, you **must** wait for GCLK to synchronize after changing its configuration.

> **Result:** GCLK0 now outputs **48 MHz** sourced from OSC48M.

---

## 6. Putting It Together & Enabling Peripheral Clocks

Finally, we call our two init functions and **enable a peripheral** (CAN0) by:

1. Routing a generator to the peripheral’s **PCHCTRL** (channel control), and
2. Enabling the module’s **bus clock** in **MCLK**.

```c
void CLOCK_Initialize(void) {
    /* Function to Initialize the Oscillators */
    OSCCTRL_Initialize();

    /* Function to Initialize the 32KHz Oscillators */

    GCLK0_Initialize();
    
    // Example configuring CAN0 peripherals
    GCLK_REGS->GCLK_PCHCTRL[26] = GCLK_PCHCTRL_GEN(0x0) | GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk;

    while ((GCLK_REGS->GCLK_PCHCTRL[26] & GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk) !=
           GCLK_PCHCTRL_CHEN_Msk) {
        /* Wait for synchronization */
    }

    MCLK_REGS->MCLK_AHBMASK |= (1 << 8);  // CAN0

}
```

### What’s happening here

* `OSCCTRL_Initialize();`
  Brings up **OSC48M** and waits for it to be stable.

* `GCLK0_Initialize();`
  Sets **GCLK0 = 48 MHz (OSC48M)**, divide-by-1.

* `GCLK_PCHCTRL[26] = GEN(0) | CHEN;`
  **Peripheral Channel 26** (CAN0 on SAMC21) is being **clocked by Generator 0** (GCLK0) and **enabled**.

  * `GEN(0)` selects **GCLK0** as the source for this peripheral’s channel.
  * `CHEN` actually **enables** the clock channel to the peripheral.
  * The wait loop ensures the channel is fully enabled before continuing.

* `MCLK_AHBMASK |= (1 << 8);`
  Enables the **AHB bus clock** to the **CAN0 module**.

  > On SAM devices, a peripheral typically needs **both**:
  >
  > 1. a **GCLK channel** (functional clock), and
  > 2. its **bus mask** (so the CPU can access its registers).
  >    Forgetting either one leads to “peripheral not responding” bugs.

> **Note on “32 kHz oscillators” comment:**
> The placeholder comment suggests you might later enable a **low-frequency** clock (e.g., OSC32K/RTC). It’s not used in this minimal example.

---

## Verification & Troubleshooting

* **Is the CPU really at 48 MHz?**

  * Toggle a GPIO in a tight loop and measure the frequency on a scope.
  * Or set up a timer to generate a 1 kHz square wave and confirm the period.

* **Peripheral doesn’t work?**

  * Check **both** the **GCLK\_PCHCTRL\[x]** (GEN + CHEN) **and** the **MCLK mask** for that peripheral.
  * Ensure the **source ID** for `GCLK_GENCTRL_SRC()` matches **OSC48M** on your part.
  * Make sure **SYNCBUSY** waits are present after each clock write.

* **Power saving (ONDEMAND) confusion:**

  * During bring-up, consider clearing ONDEMAND to keep the source always on. Add it back once you’re stable.

---

## Mental Model (Summary)

1. **Turn on** and **stabilize** a clock **source** (OSC48M @ 48 MHz).
2. Configure a **GCLK generator** (GCLK0) to **use that source** and **enable it**.
3. For each **peripheral**, connect a **GCLK channel** (PCHCTRL) and **enable its bus clock** (MCLK mask).
4. Always **wait for sync** after changing clock registers.

This flow will carry you through most clocking tasks on the SAMC21 family.
